Hello, everyone, and welcome back to the third chapter of discourse.
Remember the concepts we discussed in the previous chapter, the streams, cubits and blocks, because
we will use them as the foundation when learning the new flutter block concepts.
There are some important basic flutter concepts you really need to understand before getting our hands
dirty with flutter block concepts.
So we'll begin with these first in order to make sure everything goes nicely into place.
Let me start by highlighting the proverb Everyone interested in Flutter heard at least once.
Everything in Flutter is a widget, right?
So it's most that the like button, if you knew that.
Well, since in this video will be discussing floatable concepts, you must know that every concept
is actually a widget.
But what exactly is a widget?
Widgets in Flutter are classes, classes which have their own attributes and methods.
These classes can be instantiated as objects by defining the required parameters and methods into their
constructor.
As an example, let's take a look at the floating action button widget.
As you can see, there are all sorts of parameters passed through the constructor of this widget, the
foreground color, the background color, the unpressed function and many, many more.
If you tap control and click on the widget, the code will open a tab which contains the floating action
button widget, which, as I told you, is actually a class with all kinds of attributes from primitive
types like booleans, strings, double's integers to functions and even other widgets.
You may have also noticed that some widgets have a child parameter.
Well, what could be that for?
Well, since everything in Flutter is a widget, there must be a way for the framework to keep them
organized.
Right.
And what's a better way to nest and organize stuff than using a tree?
Observe this picture.
Take a look at the top of the tree.
That's the root.
Note below that you can see two other widgets emerging from it.
These are the children.
The above widget is also called the parent widget audience.
Yes, sir.
And that's how the tree evolves for every widget until there are no more children inside the tree.
Now that we know what a widget is and how Flutter organizes them, let's start with the first flutter
block concept, which is block providers.
Now, a quick note so that you won't get confused.
Remember that in the previous video I talked about cubits and blocks and the difference between the
well, there won't be a block provider and a separate cable provider.
In this case, Cubitt is a smaller part of a block, so it works the same as a block with block provider
has every flutter block feature I will discuss today will apply to both cubits and blocks.
So have you ever asked yourself, after you build your first block, how will you access it in your
UI?
How will you access it inside Flautre in the first place?
You might say that you will create a block object for every widget where it may be useful, if that's
what you are thinking.
Well, it's actually pretty wrong.
I mean, extremely wrong.
What if you have an internal block which manages the current state of the app in different network scenarios?
Think about how many widgets should have a working instance of the internal block available.
So creating an instance for every widget that needs it is a terrible idea.
Instead, what you must use is the block provide a widget.
Block provider is a flutter widget which creates and provides a block to all of its children.
This is also known as a dependency injection widget so that a single instance of a block can be provided
to multiple widgets within a subtree.
In other words, the entire subtree will benefit from a single instance of a block injected into it.
Hence the subtree will be dependent on the block we're providing.
So, for example, if we instantiate a block provider with a block A here at the top, it will be available
through the entire subtree below it.
If we instantiated here in the middle part of the three, the block instance will be available only
to the nodes below and to none of the ones above.
Notice how block provider creates the single instance of the block using a function which takes the
build context as an argument and returns the only one instance of block a bill context is like its name
is implying the context in which a specific widget is built.
So we'll have the current widget context and will be instantiating the Block A to all of its widgets.
In the subtree, but how can we access it in the subtree, the single instance of Blook A can be accessed
by calling block provider that of block context or even simpler, by calling context that block or block
an optimization technique block provider offers is that by default it will create the block Lezley,
meaning that the create function will get executed when the block is looked up for via block provider
of block a context so that there won't be a ton of created blocks when they're not needed inside the
app to override this behavior and for the block provider to create function to be run immediately as
soon as possible.
Lazy can be said to force inside the widgets parameters.
They can mine that.
Even though block provider is responsible for creating the block, it will also automatically close
the block so that there won't be any stream leaks all over the place.
OK, so this is what happens locally when you have only a screen in Europe.
But what is it going to happen where there will be a new portion of the three available to the existing
one?
This scenario can happen when we push a new screen into the navigation routing feature of Flutter.
Is the block a going to be available there, too?
The answer is no.
And that's because there is another context created on the new route, a context which the block provider
doesn't know yet.
So in order to pass the only instance of the block to the new route, we will use block provider that
value in which we'll pass the blockade to the value parameter, thus making the instance of it propagate
through the next widgets.
Note that in this case, the block provider, that value won't close the block automatically, since
we still want the block to be accessible to the assessor tree above.
Since we initially instantiated the block with block provider, it will, as I said, handle the closing
part automatically.
This was a brief introduction.
How Block can be accessed inside flutter.
But we will have a separate video in which I'll talk more in-depth about block access across every possible
scenario.
Now, as an example, to make sure you understand the block provider concept by actually practicing
it, we will start implementing the default counter app from Flutter using Block.
So let's start by creating a Futter project.
You can name it whatever you want and then add the flutter underscore block dependencies into the spec
that YAML file know that I'm also using the block the extension, so I recommend it to download it because
believe me, it will make your life easier along the way.
Since the counter feature of the app we want to implement is really simple, we will start by creating
a new Kubis called Counter Cubitt.
From here, I will start by coding an implementation that will be more extensive and self-explanatory
instead of a quicker and abstract one.
I'm doing this so that you understand all the concepts really, really well.
So in the folder created by Cube, it will open the counter state dot dot file and modify it so that
it only includes the counter state class.
This class will be the blueprint for all the possible states which will be emitted by the Cubitt.
Since this class must have the counter value, let's write it down and also create a constructor for
it.
The application must have a valid counter value at all times, so every time will have a new state emerging
from the cubitt.
The counter value must be a required attribute.
Has annotating it with the required keyword now inside the counter cubitt file.
Firstly, we need to set the initial state of the counter.
Cubitt, can you think about what the initial state is?
Well, it is definitely going to be a state.
So we will select the counter state class.
Then, as you can see, will receive an error inside VTS kilt telling us that the counter value parameter
is required.
So we need to pass it inside the constructor.
The initial state of the counter up will have the zero value, so we'll set the counter value to zero.
Then all we have to do is implement the increment and decrement functions which will meet new counter
states.
So the increment function will omit a new counter state with a new counter value passed into its constructor
account or value, which is going to be equal to the current counter value.
Plus one.
You can access the current state of a cubit by using.
A state key word, this will return an instance of the current state of our counter and by saying stay
that counter value will receive the counter value of our current counter state, the same procedure
applies to the decrement function.
The only difference being that instead of adding one will subtract one from the current counter value.
OK, so we finally created the counter cubitt successfully by using everything we learned in the previous
tutorial.
Now it's time to link the Cubitt to the UI using the first concept we learned today.
The block provider.
As you can see in the main, that dirt file, the top of the tree is actually the material app widget.
This is where the tree starts from in most of the other apps.
So from what we've learned today, in order to make our counter cubitt available throughout the entire
tree over app, we must create a block provider with it at our material app level.
So all we have to do is select the material app and then click control plus period to open up this dialogue
and then select Ruppe with Block Provider.
I told you the block fiasco's extension will come in handy then into the create parameter.
All we need to do is to take the current context and return a counter cubitt instance.
Make sure you also import the flutter underscore block up there into the import section.
OK, so what we did now is we told Flutter to create a single and unique instance of the counter cubitt
and make it available to the subtree below material app widget onto our homepage.
We will adapt the code a little bit by adding a real child to the column widget AROW, which will contain
two children, the two floating action buttons which are supposed to increment or decrement the counter.
Remember what I said when we started learning block that for every interaction and user makes with the
app, there should be a state emerging from the app letting the user know what's going on.
Having that in mind, we conclude that for every step of either of these two buttons, there should
be a new counter state, perhaps counter value shown on the screen.
To do that, we need to call the increment or decrement functions on the Cubitt instance.
But how do we access the instance of the Cubitt?
As I told you before, either by calling block provider of counter cubitt context or with in context
that block of counter cubitt, then all we have to do is to parse the incremental decrement functions
onto the unpressed parameter on the floating auction buttons, which tells us that every time we press
one of these buttons, the cubitt, that increment or decrement functions will be called adding or subtracting
one to the current state.
The question now is how do we receive the new state inside the UI?
How do we rebuild the specific text widget which prints out the counter value?
It is now time to introduce the second important flutter block concept, which is block builder.
Block Builder is, as its name suggests, a widget which helps rebuilding the UI based on some blocks
state changes.
This is the magic component which revealed the UI every single time a new state is emitted by either
block or cubie.
If you watched my previous video on Block Concepts, you have to know that this block builder is actually
you waiting for the boats your friend sent down the river.
You are the block builder waiting for the boat and its number so that you can rebuild the UI by calling
the number out loud.
Now you have to understand that rebuilding a large chunk of the UI inside your app may take a lot of
time to compute.
So that's why a good practice would be to wrap the exact part of the UI you want to rebuild inside block
builder, for example, if you have a text widget which updates from a sequence of omitted states and
that text is inside a sign of columns, rows and other widgets.
It is a huge mistake to rebuild all of them just to update the text widget.
Instead, what you should do is rebuild only the text widget by wrapping it inside.
Lochbihler syntax wise block builder is a widget which requires a block or cubitt and the builder function.
The builder function will potentially be called many times due to how flutter engine works behind the
scenes and should be a pure function that returns a widget in response to a state.
So what is a pure function, you might ask?
Well, a function where the return value depends on.
The on the functions, arguments and no others, thus making it pure, so in this case, our builder
function should return a widget, which only depends on the context and state parameters and nothing
more.
If the cubitt or block is not provided, the block builder will automatically perform a look up for
each instance using block provider and the current build context.
Now for even more control of when should the block builder rebuild the UI.
There is another parameter which you can use called build.
When this you take in a function having the previous state and the current state as parameters.
For example, if the current state contains a tax value and that tax value is greater than the previous
state tax value, you can return false so that the builder function won't trigger and won't rebuild
the UI.
OK, so it is now time to integrate Block Builder with our counter app example.
We left the app open inside the main that dart file.
The counter value of the app should be printed right inside this text widget right here.
Now all we have to do is to wrap this specific text widget into a block builder by clicking control
plus period and selecting block builder.
Not that I could have wrapped the entire center widget with a block builder instead, but that would
be wrong performance wise, since the builder function will rebuild the entire widget tree instead of
only the specific part we're interested in, which is the text value.
OK, so now into the builder function.
For every new emitted counter state, the text widget will show a new value.
The value can be accessed by calling state, not counter value and then by convert it to a string.
Since we know that the value is actually an integer, it is finally time to test out our app, a moment
which we've been waiting for so long.
So let's run it together.
As you can see, when I'm pressing the button, the counter Cubitt calculates the new counter value
and meets a new counter state with the new counter value, and then UI rebuilds with that specific value.
To make this rebuilding process even more clear, take a look at how I can play with the limited states.
I can check whether the state that counts or value is negative and print a negative text widget.
I can check if the counter value is even and print yay or I can check if the counter very is equal to
five and print number five into the UI.
I hope you can now understand the power of streams states and block.
It may seem like Block is a little overkill for a counter app, but in order to understand the concepts,
we need to try them on simple examples and then see the power of it and what amazing apps and features
you can build by using it.
I hope you understood the block builder concept because it's now time to move on to another flutter
block concept, which is block listner.
Block Listner has mainly the same structure as block builder, but it is really different in many ways.
You see, the block builder function can be called multiple times inside the flutter engine due to how
flutter engine works behind the scenes.
So, for example, navigating to another screen can't be done inside Block Builder as a response to
a state change because this action can be actually done multiple times.
Imagine the builder function inside being called five times.
Would you want the new screen to be pushed inside the navigation stack five times?
No way.
Or one.
If you want to show a snack bar or a dialogue for a new arriving state, the builder function may be
called four times by the flutter engine, rebuilding the UI accordingly.
But the snack bar will be shown four times as well as the dialog box, which pretty much is not what
we want.
This is where Block Listener comes into place as its name suggests.
This is a flutter widget which listens to any state change as Block Builder does.
But instead of building a widget, as block builder did with the builder function, it takes a simple
void function called listner, which is called only once per state, not including the initial state.
Again, for fine grained control.
There is also a list and when parameter function you can pass to tell the block listener when to call
the listener function or not as build one parameter was for the block builder widget to understand block
listener easily.
What we want to do is the following.
Every time the user presses plus or minus buttons, there should be a snack bar.
Showing in the bottom part of the screen saying incremented or degremont it, depending, of course,
on which button was pressed.
Can you guess how we're going to do that?
Let's start with the beginning.
So what happens when we press either of these two buttons, the increment or decrement function from
inside the cube, it gets cold.
What do these functions do?
Well, they emit a new counter state with the new increment or diclemente the counter value.
So this is mainly where Flutter understands what the press button does.
And this is where we should tell flutters UI to a state that we incremented or diclemente the value.
So all we have to do is to add another boolean attribute to the counter state class calling.
It was incremented.
This was incremented field will be to when we pressed the plus button and false.
When we press the minus button, we can go into the counter cubitt class and modify the incremental
decremental function accordingly.
Setting up the was incremented burm as we discussed, and now we can go back inside our block listner
and based on our status was incremented attribute.
We will display a snack bar accordingly to whether the counter value of our counter state was incremented
or diclemente.
And voila, you can see from the screen that our application works as we want it.
So perhaps you're in our situation right now when you're updating the UI using blog builder and also
showing a snack bar using block listner.
Isn't there an easier way to do it?
Of course there is.
It's called Block Consumer.
Block Consumer is a widget which combines both Block Lisner and Block Builder into a single widget.
How convenient.
So instead of writing Block Listner on top of Block Builder, as we did in our example, actually we
can refactor the code by writing both of them inside the block consumer widget and then copy and paste
the necessary content from block listener to the listener function and the content from block builder
to the builder function.
And voila, the code is no more readable and easier to maintain and the application works perfect.
Another amazing flutter block concept, which you use a lot is repository provider.
Repository provider is the same exact widget as a block provider.
The only difference being that it provides a single repository class instance instead of a single block
instance.
We will talk about the repository more thoroughly in future tutorials when I introduce you to the block
architecture.
In a couple of words, a repository is a class which has the main functions which make flutter, communicate
with the outer data, layer, the Internet, the APIs, the databases and so on and so forth.
It again will cover these concepts in depth in future tutorials, in more feature rich applications.
You can imagine that there will be maybe tens of blocks in cubits having their own functionality in
this material.
We talked about how we can provide only one block or Cubitt to UI, but what are we going to do when
we have ten blocks to provide and ten blocks to listen to?
When we want to display ten different snack bars, we will stack them together one after another?
No, we will definitely use multiple provider, multi block listener and even multi repository provider.
So these are mainly the simple concept widgets we discussed before.
But instead of taking only one block or Cubitt or even a repository, they can take as many as they
possibly can.
OK, so it is finally time to wrap things up.
If it's the first time you solve this concept, this might be a pretty difficult tutorial.
And I recommend you to watch this video at least twice and then try to build this counter app by yourself
so that you can understand the flutter block concepts by practicing instead of just watching the tutorial.
Having all of these in mind, it's time to move to another chapter in chapter number four.
I'm going to show you why it is crucial to have a clean structure architecture in mind while designing
and coding a flutter block based application.
Together, it will find out what presentation, business logic and data layers mean and what benefits
do they bring in the long run.
With that being said, and looking forward to seeing each and every one of you up next, stay tuned
and let us get Wickett.